SPACECRAFT SYSTEMS ENGINEERINGSPACECRAFT SYSTEMS ENGINEERING Fourth Edition Edited by Peter Fortescue University of Southampton, UK Graham Swinerd University of Southampton, UK John Stark Queen Mary, University of London, UK A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publicatio n This edition ﬁrst published 2011 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd First Edition published in 1991, Second Edition published in 1995, Third Edition published in 2003 Registered ofﬁce John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com. The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted bythe UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher. Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. Designations used by companies to distinguish their p roducts are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, s ervice marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered.It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professionaladvice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Spacecraft systems engineering / edited by Peter Fortescue, Graham Swinerd, John Stark.—4th ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-470-75012-4 (hardback) Space vehicles—Design and construction. 2. Astronautics—Systems engineering. I. Fortescue, Peter W. II. Swinerd, Graham. III. Stark, John. TL875.S68 2011 629.47 /prime4—dc22 2011015486 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Print ISBN: 9780470750124 ePDF ISBN: 9781119971016oBook ISBN: 9781119971009ePub ISBN: 9781119978367Mobi ISBN: 9781119978374 Set in 10/12pt Times by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India.Dedicated to the memory of Nicky Skinner 1978–2011CONTENTS List of Contributors xiii Preface to the Fourth Edition xvPreface to the Third Edition xix Preface to the Second Edition xxi Preface to the First Edition xxiiiList of Acronyms xxv 1 INTRODUCTION John P. W. Stark, Graham G. Swinerd and Adrian R. L. Tatnall 1.1 Payloads and Missions 3 1.2 A System View of Spacecraft 4 1.3 The Future 9 2 THE SPACECRAFT ENVIRONMENT AND ITS EFFECT ON DESIGN John P. W. Stark 2.1 Introduction 11 2.2 Pre-Operational Spacecraft Environments 11 2.3 Operational Spacecr aft Environments 17 2.4 Environmental Effects on Design 40 3 DYNAMICS OF SPACECRAFT Peter W. Fortescue and Graham G. Swinerd 3.1 Introduction 493.2 Trajectory Dynamics 51 3.3 General Attitude Dynamics 58 3.4 Attitude Motion of Speciﬁc Types of Spacecraft 633.5 Oscillatory Modes 71 3.6 In Conclusion 73 Appendix: The Inertia Matrix 73 4 CELESTIAL MECHANICS John P. W. Stark, Graham G. Swinerd and Peter W. Fortescue 4.1 Introduction 79 4.2 The Two-body Problem—Particle Dynamics 814.3 Specifying the Orbit 92 4.4 Orbit Perturbations 93viii CONTENTS 4.5 Restricted Three-body Problem 106 5 MISSION ANALYSIS John P. W. Stark and Graham G. Swinerd 5.1 Introduction 111 5.2 Keplerian Orbi t Transfers 114 5.3 Mission Analysis 116 5.4 Polar LEO/Remote-Sensing Satellites 122 5.5 Satellite Constellations 1275.6 Geostationary Earth Orbits (GEO) 133 5.7 Highly Elliptic Orbits 143 5.8 Interplanetary Missions 147 6 PROPULSION SYSTEMS J. Barrie Moss and John P. W. Stark 6.1 Systems Classiﬁcation 177 6.2 Chemical Rockets 180 6.3 Spacecraft Propulsion 202 6.4 Electric Propulsion 206 7 LAUNCH VEHICLES J. Barrie Moss and Graham E. Dorrington 7.1 Introduction 221 7.2 Basic Launch Vehicle Performance and Operation 222 7.3 Spacecraft Launch Phases and Mission Planning 231 7.4 The Ariane 5 Launch Vehicle 236 7.5 US Crewed Launch Systems 239 7.6 Small Launchers and Reusable S ub-Orbital Vehicles 242 7.7 Re-Entry into Earth’s Atmosphere 244 7.8 Speciﬁc Launch Costs and Reliability 247 8 SPACECRAFT STRUCTURES John M. Houghton 8.1 Introduction 251 8.2 Design Requirements 251 8.3 Material Selection 256 8.4 Analysis 263 8.5 Design Veriﬁcation 274 8.6 Impact Protection 276 8.7 Conﬁguration Examples 278 8.8 The Future of Space Structures 285 9 ATTITUDE CONTROL Peter W. Fortescue and Graham G. Swinerd 9.1 Introduction 289 9.2 ACS Overview 290CONTENTS ix 9.3 The Spacecraft Attitude Response 294 9.4 Torques and Torquers 301 9.5 Attitude Measurement 309 9.6 ACS Computation 321 10 ELECTRICAL POWER SYSTEMS John P. W. Stark 10.1 Introduction 327 10.2 Power System Elements 328 10.3 Primary Power Systems 330 10.4 Secondary Power Systems: Batteries 345 10.5 Power Management, Distribution and Control 34710.6 Power Budget 350 11 THERMAL CONTROL OF SPACECRAFT Chris J. Savage 11.1 Introduction 357 11.2 The Thermal Environment 358 11.3 Thermal Balance 362 11.4 Thermal Analysis 36611.5 Thermal Design 371 11.6 Thermal Technology 375 11.7 Thermal Design Veriﬁcation 386 11.8 Example of Satellite Thermal Design—XMM/Newton 390 12 TELECOMMUNICATIONS Ray E. Sheriff and Adrian R. L. Tatnall 12.1 Introduction 395 12.2 Techniques of Radio Communications 400 12.3 The Communications Payload 422 12.4 Conclusion 436 13 TELEMETRY, COMMAND, DATA HANDLING AND PROCESSING Nigel P. Fillery and David Stanton 13.1 Introduction 439 13.2 System Architecture 440 13.3 Telemetry Data Formatting 442 13.4 Telecommand 44913.5 Communication Techniques and Protocols 455 13.6 On-Board Data Handling (OBDH) and Processing 458 13.7 Technology 464 13.8 Tools and Controlling Documents 466 14 GROUND SEGMENT Franck Chatel 14.1 Introduction 467x CONTENTS 14.2 The Ground Station 468 14.3 Flight Dynamics 475 14.4 The Ground Data System 480 14.5 The Flight Operations System 483 15 SPACECRAFT MECHANISMS Guglielmo S. Aglietti 15.1 Introduction 49515.2 One-Shot Devices 497 15.3 Continuously and Intermitt ently Operating Devices 507 15.4 Components 513 15.5 Materials 520 15.6 Tribology 521 15.7 Testing and Veriﬁcation 523 15.8 Conclusion 524 16 SPACECRAFT ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY ENGINEERING Ken M. Redford 16.1 Introduction 527 16.2 Examples of EMC Problems 528 16.3 EMC Speciﬁcations 528 16.4 Electromagnetic Compatibility—Terms and Deﬁnitions 529 16.5 EMC Fundamentals 53016.6 The Systems Approach to EMC 531 16.7 EMC Categories 531 16.8 Electrostatic Discharge 535 16.9 Spacecraft Grounding Schemes 536 16.10 Major Causes of Spacecraft EMC Problems 541 16.11 Analysis Methods for Spacecraft EMC Engineering 542 17 ASSEMBLY, INTEGRATION AND VERIFICATION Terry Ransome 17.1 Introduction 54517.2 Some Deﬁnitions 545 17.3 The Veriﬁcation Plan 547 17.4 Relationship between Analysis and Test 551 17.5 The AIV Plan 552 17.6 Testing: General 553 17.7 Test Types 55717.8 Model Philosophy 561 17.9 Build Standards and Applications 564 17.10 Ground Support Equipment 567 17.11 Checkpoints in the AIV Programme 57117.12 Veriﬁcation Closeout 572 17.13 Launch Preparation 572 17.14 Conclusion 573CONTENTS xi 18 SMALL SATELLITE ENGINEERING AND APPLICATIONS Martin N. Sweeting and Craig I. Underwood 18.1 Introduction 575 18.2 Small Satellite Design Philosophy 579 18.3 Small Satellite System Design 580 18.4 COTS Components in the Space Environment 583 18.5 Microsatellite Platforms 58718.6 Minisatellite Platforms 590 18.7 Nanosatellite Platforms 590 18.8 Affordable Launches for Small Satellites 592 18.9 In-Orbit Operations 594 18.10 Small Satellite Applications 597 18.11 Picosatellites and Recent Advances in Miniaturization 603 18.12 Conclusion 604 19 PRODUCT ASSURANCE Geoffrey Hall 19.1 Introduction 607 19.2 Product Assurance in a Project 609 19.3 Reliability/Dependability 613 19.4 Parts 618 19.5 Materials and Processes 622 19.6 Product Assurance in M anufacturing, AI&V 626 19.7 Safety 634 19.8 Product Assurance in Operations 63719.9 Software Product Assurance 638 19.10 PA in Technology Developments 640 19.11 The Assurance Message 642 20 SPACECRAFT SYSTEM ENGINEERING Adrian R. L. Tatnall, John B. Farrow, Massimo Bandecchi and C. Richard Francis 20.1 Introduction 64320.2 System Engineering 644 20.3 Concurrent Engineering 654 20.4 A Case Study: Cryosat 667 20.5 Conclusion 678 Index 679LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS EDITORS Peter W. Fortescue Aeronautics and Astronautics, Faculty of Engineering and the Environment, University of Southampton, UK (retired) Graham G. Swinerd Aeronautics and Astronautics, Faculty of Engineering and the Environment, University of Southampton, UKJohn P. W. Stark School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary, University of London, UK AUTHORS Guglielmo S. Aglietti Aeronautics and Astronautics, Faculty of Engineering and the Environment, University of Southampton, UK Massimo Bandecchi European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), European Space Agency, The Netherlands Franck Chatel German Space Operations Center (GSOC), Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany Graham E. Dorrington School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary, University of London, UK John B. Farrow International Space University, Strasbourg, FranceNigel P. Fillery EADS Astrium, Portsmouth, UK C. Richard Francis European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), European Space Agency, The Netherlands Geoffrey Hall Moreton Hall Associates, Maidenhead, UK John M. Houghton EADS Astrium, Stevenage, UK J. Barrie Moss School of Engineering, Cranﬁeld University, UK Terry Ransome EADS Astrium, Stevenage, UK Ken M. Redford British Aerospace, Bristol, UKxiv LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS Chris J. Savage European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), European Space Agency, The Netherlands (retired) Ray E. Sheriff School of Engineering, Design and Technology, University of Bradford, UK David Stanton Keltik Ltd, Hampton Hill, UKMartin N. Sweeting Surrey Space Centre, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK Adrian R. L. Tatnall Aeronautics and Astronautics, Faculty of Engineering and the Environment, University of Southampton, UK Craig I. Underwood Surrey Space Centre, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UKPREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION When I was thinking about what to say in this foreword to the fourth edition, I had a look back over the previous editions to get a ﬂavour of what was going on when they were published—the ﬁrst two decades ago! Obviously a great deal has changed in that time, which is of course reﬂected in the current book’s content. However, one aspect that has remained constant throughout that time is the inﬂuence that the US Space Shuttle has had as the work-horse of the West’s human spaceﬂight programme. The Shuttle’s ﬁrst launch three decades ago, in 1981, was for me one of those landmark events that somehow spurs the memory to recall exactly where you were and what youwere doing at the time. For me, the 12 thof April 1981 was a glorious spring day, during which my wife and I enjoyed the climb of a peak in the remote north-west Highlands of Scotland. However, sensing the historic character of the day’s events, I do recall a resolve at the end of that glorious day to ﬁnd out how the ﬁrst historic ﬂight of Shuttle Columbia had gone. The subsequent history of the Shuttle programme is well documented. Despite the high cost of operations, the programme has overall been hugely successful, but also overshadowed by the human cost of desperate tragedies. Coming full circle, this year sees the retirement of this remarkable machine, again an event with a personal dimension—the commencement and retirement of the Shuttle’s space career have coincided closely with my own career in the space industry and academia! Consequently, like an old friend, it’s always been there. The Shuttle retirement has inevitably forced a rethink of the US human spaceﬂight programme. As a consequence, the Bush administration proposed the Constellation pro-gramme which centred on a new crewed spacecraft Orion. This was to be lifted to orbit by the Shuttle replacement—the man-rated Ares 1 launcher. The other signiﬁcant component of the programme was a heavy-lift launch vehicle called Ares 5, which would indepen- dently orbit the massive payloads required for human exploration beyond Earth orbit. The main objectives of the programme were a return to the moon by 2020, and preparations for a crewed landing on Mars in the longer term. However, the incoming Obama admin- istration has effectively overturned the ‘Bush vision’, throwing open the development of human access to orbit to private venture, abandoning the immediate prospect of humanexploration beyond Earth orbit, and extending the lifetime of the International Space Sta- tion to 2020. In the short-term this has led to the rather bizarre situation of focusing US human spaceﬂight activities on Earth orbit, but without the independent means of US astronauts to reach it. At the time of writing, the future development of US human spaceﬂight is unclear, which raises the prospect that the next footprints on the moon’s surface may be those of Chinese taikonauts. As far as the book content is concerned,xvi PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION this has not been a good time to attempt to write about this aspect of space activity. For example, reference to the Space Shuttle is minimal throughout the current edition,and the emphasis in the launch vehicles section (Chapter 7) is on the European Arianelauncher programme (although there is some discussion of the Ares launchers, which in the fullness of time may, or may not, be relevant). The majority of the book content, however, focuses on the design and engineering of unmanned spacecraft, and around the turn of the millennium, the ‘faster, better, cheaper’ design philosophy was particularly inﬂuential in reducing the size and mass of sciencespacecraft in particular. However, this has been tempered somewhat by the occurrence ofinopportune in-orbit failures, which have provided lessons that maybe faster and cheaperare not necessarily better. However, the explosion of interest in small, capable spacecraftcontinues unabated, and this is reﬂected in an updated Chapter 18 on small satelliteengineering. At the other end of the size range, there are a number of major robotic spacecraft programmes that will be making the headlines soon after this edition hits the book shelves.Perhaps, the most signiﬁcant of these is the follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope,which has been christened the James Webb Space Telescope. This is to be launched inaround 2014 to the L 2Sun-Earth Lagrange point, around 1.5 million km from Earth. With a mirror nearly three times the size of Hubble’s, the scientists are looking forwardto an explosion of new cosmological discoveries resulting from its operation. At the sametime, the ESA comet probe Rosetta should be beginning its mission in orbit around comet67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, and it is anticipated that the Rosetta data will provide astep function in our understanding of the origins of our local environment, the solarsystem. In the world of application satellites, a new global navigation satellite system called Galileo should become operational, also around 2014. This is a civil programme, funded by the European Union, involving the launch of a constellation of 30 satellitesin Earth orbits at a height of around 23 000 km. It is hoped that the introduction of thisnon-military system will remove the reticence of civilian organisations to embrace thetechnology of satellite navigation in their operations. One signiﬁcant development arisingfrom this is the prospect of satellite navigation being fully utilized in the arena of civilair trafﬁc control. This fourth edition of Spacecraft Systems Engineering has been signiﬁcantly revised and updated throughout, so that readers can master the many facets involved in an unmanned space vehicle project, like those mentioned above, from early system design through to in-orbit ﬂight operations. There are also some ‘all-new’ features which are worthy ofadditional mention. Current trends in interplanetary missions have suggested that a newsection on low-thrust trajectories would be helpful, and this has been added to the already-extensive Mission Analysis chapter (Chapter 5). The previous Chapter 14 on GroundStations has been rewritten. The new version has been entitled ‘Ground Segment’ toemphasize that this area is not just about ground station aspects, but also includes manyother activities such as ﬂight operations. A new chapter (Chapter 17) has been addeddevoted to the important topic of Assembly, Integration and Veriﬁcation, which focuseson the later stages of a spacecraft project when the whole system is brought togetherand tested prior to launch. The old chapter on Product Assurance has been completelyrewritten (Chapter 19) to reﬂect the diverse aspects of PA, including that of software. Thisis particularly pertinent in the space sector, in which the manufactured ‘products’ oftenmust survive many years in a hostile environment without the beneﬁt of maintenance.PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION xvii The ﬁnal chapter on Spacecraft System Engineering (Chapter 20) has also been rewritten, changing the emphasis to discuss system design methods—in particular that of concurrent engineering design. System design in action is illustrated by discussion of the designdevelopment of the ESA Cryosat spacecraft, which is used as a case study. Finally, the editors wish to thank the army of contributors who have given their time and effort to bring this edition to fruition—without them a new edition would not have been possible. We are also indebted to the team at Wiley, in particular to Nicky Skinnerand Gill Whitley, whose assistance throughout the period of compilation of the manuscriptwas invaluable. As this stage was drawing to a close, and the production process was beginning, we were shocked and saddened by the sudden death of Nicky Skinner in March. My regret is that our working relationship was conducted purely by email as is often thecase these days. Although I did not have an opportunity to meet up and consolidatethat relationship, nevertheless I feel I got to know Nicky very well. I am thankful for her assistance throughout, and it is entirely appropriate that this edition is dedicated to her memory. Graham Swinerd Southampton, March 2011PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION Graham Swinerd, my friend and colleague, took over the running of the Space Technology short courses at Southampton University when I retired in 1989. Who would be a better choice than Graham to take over the role of principal editor for this new edition of Spacecraft Systems Engineering? I am sure that Graham will build on the reputation thatthe past editions have achieved, and I wish him success in his new role. Over to you,Graham ... Peter Fortescue ,Southampton, July 2002 Since the publication of the previous edition, Dan Goldin’s ‘Faster, Better, Cheaper’ space mission philosophy has had a major impact upon American activities. As a consequence, the last of the heavyweight interplanetary spacecraft, Cassini, was launched in October1997 on its mission to Saturn. Programmes such as NEAR Shoemaker, which launcheda relatively small but capable spacecraft in February 1996 to orbit and ultimately to land on a small body—the asteroid 433 Eros—have substituted this type of mission. These ‘small missions’ have signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced current and proposed planetary explorationprogrammes. In the same interim period, we have also seen the launch of constellations into low Earth orbit, for global mobile communications using handheld telephones—in particular, the Iridium constellation, the ﬁrst satellites of which were lofted in May 1997. Althoughﬁnancial problems have impacted this programme, it nevertheless heralds large-scale useof constellation systems in many application areas. There are great beneﬁts to the usage of these distributed systems, not only in communications and navigation applications but also in improving the temporal coverage of Earth observation. There is also an implicit trend here to use a number of small, but capable, spacecraft to do the job of one or two large satellites. The principal driver for the development of small satellite technology is the reduction in cost associated with access to space. The elements contributing to this philosophy are low launch costs, a short design, build and test period, a less complex ground interfaceand operations, and the recognition of a means of testing new spacecraft technologies in a relatively low ﬁnancial risk environment. At the other end of the size spectrum, December 1998 saw the ﬁrst elements of the International Space Station (ISS) being brought together in orbit. If development continuesxx PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION as originally planned, around 2005, the ISS will become the largest structure ( ∼400 tonnes) ever to be deployed in Earth orbit, marking the beginning of permanent habitation in space. These various developments have had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the structure of the new edition of the book. The major changes involve the removal of the chapter on atmospheric re-entry, and the addition of a new chapter on small satellite engineering and applications. Much of the removed material has been redistributed in other chapters, however, forexample, Earth atmosphere re-entry is included in Chapter 7 (Launch Vehicles), andsections on aero-manoeuvring have been included in Chapter 5 (Mission Analysis). The new Chapter 18 on Small Satellites has been contributed by Martin Sweeting and Craig Underwood of the Surrey Space Centre, based at the University of Surrey, UK. Bothindividuals are recognized internationally for their expertise in this ﬁeld. The chapter, built on the huge expertise of the Surrey Space Centre, gives insights into small satellite systems engineering in general. Given the growing activity in this area, no textbook of this kind is complete without such a contribution. Other chapters have been rewritten—in particular, Chapter 8 (Spacecraft Structures), Chapter 11 (Thermal Control), Chapter 16 (Electromagnetic Compatibility) and Chapter 19 (Spacecraft Systems Engineering)—and most of the others have been substantially revised, including a discussion of constellation design and small-bodymissions in Chapter 5 (Mission Analysis). Some of the authors of the second edition have retired, and new names have appeared in the contributors list. The editors are grateful to all of them for their contributions. It is also sad to report that three of our previous authors have died in the interim—HowardSmith (Telecommunications), Les Woolliscroft (Spacecraft Electromagnetic CompatibilityEngineering) and Mervyn Briscoe (Spacecraft Mechanisms). Each of them will be sadly missed. The reader may have noticed the dedication at the front of the book to one of these authors, Mervyn Briscoe, who was actively involved in revising his chapter on Mecha- nisms when he died in 2001. Our thanks are also due to Guglielmo Aglietti who jumped into the hot seat to complete the revision of Mervyn’s chapter as a co-author. Mervyn gave loyal service as a contributor to the short course activity at Southampton over manyyears, and we would like to acknowledge this by dedicating this edition to his memory. Finally, it is appropriate to thank both Peter Fortescue and John Stark for their pio- neering work in bringing the previous editions to fruition, and for their valued assistance with this one. Graham Swinerd Southampton, July 2002PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION This second edition comes in response to a phone call that we editors had been dreading. ‘Had we thought of producing a second edition?’ After much consideration our answer was ‘Yes’, and here it is. Not only has it given our contributing authors a chance to update the material in their chapters—the technology is developing all the time and ﬁve years is a long time! It has also given us the opportunity to rectify some of the errors in the ﬁrst edition (and possibly to introduce some new ones), and to respond to suggestions from readers about the content and to our inevitable ‘second thoughts’ on the matter. As a result there are two new chapters. The ﬁrst is on Mechanisms—important equipment on spacecraft. They are an essential part of many of the systems that are covered in the other chapters, but having their ownrequirements we have given them chapter status here. They are a specialist topic, involvingthe problem of moving one mechanical part relative to another. For an application that hasa long life, no servicing, no disturbance to the structure, and ideally no single point failure as design objectives, mechanism designers are faced with a challenging task. Chapter 16 tells us how they have responded to it. The second additional chapter addresses the subject of System Engineering. The ﬁrst edition has no hyphens in its title. Those who read the title as meaning ‘The Engineering of Spacecraft Systems’ will probably have found that the content was much as they had expected. Indeed there have been enough satisﬁed readers to cause the dreaded questionof a second edition to be raised. However, it could also be read as meaning ‘SystemsEngineering of Spacecraft’, and those who interpreted it as such will no doubt have been disappointed to have found little on the discipline of System Engineering in the book. So our response is to retain the same ambiguous title, and to retain the same thrust as in the ﬁrst edition. But we have added a new chapter (No. 19), which focuses on thesubject of Systems Engineering of spacecraft. It is written by authors within the spacecraft industry who have experience in that activity. We hope it will bring together the piecesof the jigsaw puzzle that are to be found among the other chapters, and will show howthey can be ﬁtted together harmoniously to form a viable whole—a spacecraft that meets its design objectives in a viable manner. Since the ﬁrst edition some of our authors have moved to new locations; some have retired. New names have appeared in our list of contributors. We editors are grateful to them all—new and old—and trust that this edition presents ‘second thoughts’ that are an improvement on the ﬁrst.PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION This book has grown out of a set of course notes, which accompany a series of short courses given at Southampton University. These courses started in 1974 with a two week ‘space technology’ course, and they are aimed at the recent science or engineering graduate who wishes to become a spacecraft engineer. The courses are still thriving, now serving much of European industry, with one-week versions for experienced engineers, sometimes senior ones, who are specialists in their own ﬁelds. On the courses, the attendees work in competing teams on a project that involves design- ing a spacecraft in response to an overall objective. Over the years, mission designshave been directed at all application areas: science, astronomy, communications and Earth observations. There is now a ‘museum’ of models that demonstrate vehicle lay- outs and support the attendees’ presentations covering operation, subsystem speciﬁcation and launch constraints. These models demonstrate system viability rather than detailed design. The projects are designed at ‘system level’, and their supervision has provided abasis for deciding the level of detail that should be included in this book. The coverage in this book is therefore aimed at giving the breadth that is needed by system engineers, with an emphasis on the bus aspect rather than on the payload. The specialist engineer is well served with textbooks, which cover many of the subsystems in detail and in depth. He is unlikely to learn very much about his own specialist topic from this book. But he may well learn something about other specialists’ disciplines, and, it is hoped, enough for him to appreciate the trade-offs that affect his own subsystem inrelation to others. Chapters 2 to 5 set the general scene for spacecraft, and particularly for satellites. They must operate in an environment that is generally hostile compared to that with which we are familiar on Earth, and the main features of this are described in Chapter 2. Chapters 3 and 4 address the dynamics of objects in space, where the vehicles will respond to forces and moments that are minute, and which would be discounted as of no signiﬁcance if they occurred on Earth. Indeed, most of them do occur here, but we do not often operate in a fully free state, and our Earth-bound vehicles are subject to other, much larger forces. Chapter 5 relates the motion of the spacecraft to Earth rather than to the inertially based reference system of celestial mechanics. Chapters 6 to 15 address the main subsystems. Chapters 7 and 8 cover the subjects of getting off the ground and returning through the atmosphere. Chapters 6, 9 to 12 and14 deal with the main subsystems on board the spacecraft, that include the on-board end of the telemetry and control link (Chapter 14) with ground control (Chapter 15). The communication link is covered in Chapter 13 in which the fundamentals of the subjectxxiv PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION are included together with their rather special application to spacecraft. This is relevant to the telemetry and control link and to a communications payload. Chapter 16 introduces electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), one of the subjects that must be addressed by the systems engineer if the various subsystems are to work in harmony. Product assurance is of vital concern to spacecraft engineers. Their product(s) must survive a hostile launch environment and then must last many years without the luxury of any maintenance. It does great credit to the discipline they exercise, that so many of their products do so. We editors would like to express our thanks to the authors who have contributed chapters in the book. Most of them have lectured on the courses mentioned above. Our task has been to whittle down the material they have provided since they have been very generous. We are grateful too for their patience. The conversion of course notes into abook was expected to be a short process. How wrong we were! We would also like to thank colleagues Graham Swinerd and Adrian Tatnall, who read some of the texts and gave advice. And ﬁnally our thanks to Sally Mulford, who hasconverted some much-abused text into typescript with patience and good humour.LIST OF ACRONYMS AATSR Advanced Along-Track Scanning Radiometer ABM Apogee Boost Motor AC Alternating current ACS Attitude Control System ACU Antenna Control UnitA/D Analogue to digitalADEOS Advanced Earth Observing System ADR Active Debris Removal AFT Abbreviated Functional TestAGC Automatic gain control AIT Assembly, integration and test AIV Assembly, integration and veriﬁcation AKM Apogee Kick Motor AM Amplitude modulationAMI Active Microwave Instrument AMOOS Aero-Manoeuvring Orbit-to-Orbit Shuttle AO Announcement of Opportunity AOCS Attitude and Orbit Control System AOP Announcement of Opportunity Package AOS Acquisition of signal, also Advanced OrbitingSystems AOTV Aero-assisted Orbital Transfer Vehicle APM Antenna Pointing Mechanism, alsoAttached Pressurized Module APS Active Pixel SensorAQAP Allied Quality Assurance Publication ARQ Automatic report queuing ASAP Ariane Structure for Auxiliary Payloads ASAR Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar ASIC Application-speciﬁc integrated circuit ASK Amplitude-shift keying ASS Antenna Support Structure ASW Address and synchronization word ATCS Active Thermal Control System ATSR Along-track Scanning Radiometer AU Astronomical Unit (mean distance from Earth to Sun) BCDT Binary code data transfer BCH Bose-Chaudhuri- Hocquenchem BCR Battery Charge Regulator BDR Battery Discharge Regulator BER Bit error rate BMDO Ballistic Missile Defence Organization BMU Battery Management Unit BOL Beginning of lifeBPF Band-pass ﬁlter BPSK Bi-phase-shift keying BRTS Bilateration Ranging Transponder System BSF Back-Surface Field BSR Back-Surface Reﬂector CA Contingency Analysisxxvi LIST OF ACRONYMS CAD Computer Aided Design CADU Channel Access Data Unit CAM Civil, Aircraft, Military CCB Conﬁguration Control Board CCD Charge coupled device CCIR Comit ´e Consultatif International de Radiocommunication CCITT Comit ´e Consultatif International de T´el´ephonie et de T´el´egraphie CCSDS Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems CCU Central Communications Unit CDF Concurrent Design Facility C&DH Control and Data Handling C&DM Conﬁguration and Data Management CDMA Code-division multiple access CDR Critical Design ReviewCE Concurrent EngineeringCEV Command Execution Veriﬁcation CFDP CCSDS File Delivery Protocol CFRP Carbon ﬁbre reinforced plastic CHAMP CHAllenging Minisatellite Payload CHRIS Compact High Resolution Imaging Spectrometer CIS Confederation of Independent States CLA Coupled loads analysis CLTU Command Link Transfer Unit CMG Control moment gyroscope CMOS Complementary metal oxide semiconductor CNES Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (FrenchNational Space Agency) COMSAT Communications SatelliteCOTS Commercial off the shelf CPL Capillary-pumped loop CPM Coarse pointing mechanism CR Corrosion resistanceCRP Contingency Recovery Procedure CSG Centre Spatial Guyanais CTM Collapsible Tube MastCVCM Collected volatile condensable materials CW Continuous-wave DARPA Defence Advanced Research Project Agency DB Data Base DC Direct current DCP Data Collection PlatformDoD Department of Defence (USA) DLR (German Aerospace Centre) DM Development ModelDOF Degree of freedomDORIS Determination of Orbit and RadiopositioningIntegrated by Satellite DPL Declared Parts List DPSK Differential phase-shift keying DRS Data Relay SatelliteDSBSC Double side-band suppressed carrier modulation DS-CDMA Direct Sequence Code Division Multiple Access DSN Deep Space NetworkDSP Digital signal processing, also Digital Signal Processor ECR Engineering Change Request ECSS European Cooperation for Space Standardization EDA Electrically Despun Antenna EDAC Error detection and correction EEE Electrical, Electronic and ElectromechanicalLIST OF ACRONYMS xxvii EGSE Electrical Ground Support Equipment EIRP Equivalent isotropic radiated power ELV Expendable Launch Vehicle EM Electrical Model, also Engineering Model EMC Electromagnetic compatibility EMI Electromagnetic interference EMP Electromagnetic pulse EOEP Earth Observation Envelope Programme EOL End of lifetime EOS Earth Observing System e.p. Equivalent particleER-MIL Established Reliability-MILERS Earth Resources Satellite ERT Earth Received Time ESA European Space AgencyESATAN European Space Agency Network Analyser ESD Electrostatic dischargeESOC European Space Operations Centre ESTEC European Space Research and Technology Centre ESTL European Space Tribology Laboratory EUMET- SATEuropean Meteorological Satellite Organization EURECA European Retrievable Carrier EUTEL- SATEuropean TelecommunicationsSatellite Organization EV A Extra-vehicular activity EWSK East-West Station Keeping FAR Flight Acceptance Review FBC Faster, Better, CheaperFCP Flight Control ProcedureFDIR Fault detection, inspection and recovery FDMA Frequency-division multiple access FE Finite elementFEA Finite element analysis FEEP Field emission electric propulsion FEM Flight Engineering Model FET Field effect transistorFFSK Fast frequency-shift keying FGSE Fluids Ground Support Equipment FIFO First-In-First-Out FIRST Far Infra-Red Space Telescope FITS Failures per 10 9hours FM Flight Model, also Frequency Modulation FMECA Failure Mode Effects and Criticality Analysis FOG Fibre optic gyroscope FOP Flight Operations Procedure f.o.r. Frame of reference FOV Field of view FPGA Field Programmable Gate Array FPM Fine Pointing Mechanism, also Fine-pointing mode FRB Failure Review Board FRR Flight Readiness ReviewFRSI Flexible reusable surface insulation FS Fail safe FSK Frequency-shift keyingFTA Fault Tree AnalysisGEM Giotto Extended Mission GEO Geostationary Earth orbit GLONASS Global Navigation Satellite System GMT Greenwich Mean Time GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System GOCE Gravity ﬁeld and steady state Ocean CirculationExplorer GOES Geostationary Orbit Environmental Satellites GOMOS Global ozone monitoring by the occultation of stars GPS Global Positioning Systemxxviii LIST OF ACRONYMS GRACE Gravity Recovery And Climate Experiment GRO Gamma Ray Observation GSE Ground Support EquipmentGSFC Goddard Space Flight Center GSOC German Space Operations Centre G/T Ground trackGTO Geostationary transfer orbit HEO Highly elliptical orbit HGA High Gain AntennaHGAS High Gain Antenna SystemHOTOL Horizontal take-off and landing HPA High power ampliﬁer HRG Hemispherical Resonator Gyroscope HRSI High-temperature reusable surface insulation HST High Speed Telemetry, also Hubble Space Telescope IC Integrated circuit ICBM Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile ICU Instrument Control Unit, also Intelligent Control Unit IDE Integrated Design Environment IDHT Instrument data-handling and transmission IDM Integrated Design Model IF Intermediate frequency IFOV Instantaneous ﬁeld of viewIFR Inertial frame of referenceIFRB International Frequency Registration Board IM IntermodulationINMAR- SATInternational Maritime Satellite Organization INTELSAT International TelecommunicationsSatellite Organization IOAR In Orbit Acceptance Review IOT In Orbit Test IP Internet ProtocolIPN Interplanetary Internet IPNRG IPN Research Group IQ In-phase and Quadrature IRAS Infra-Red Astronomical Satellite IRIG Inter-Range Instrumentation Group IRTF Internet Research Task Force ISC Integrated System Check ISDN Integrated Services Digital Network ISO Infrared Space Observatory, also International Organization for Standardization ISS International Space Station IST Integrated System Test IT Information Technology ITU International Telecommunications Union JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency JGM Joint Gravity ModelJHUAPL Johns Hopkins University Applied PhysicsLaboratory JPL Jet Propulsion LaboratoryKSA K-band Steerable Antenna KSC Kennedy Space Center LAM Liquid Apogee MotorLBR Low bit-rateLDEF Long Duration Exposure Facility LEAF Large European Acoustic Facility LED Light emitting diode LEO Low Earth Orbit LEOP Launch and Early Orbit Phase LET Linear energy transfer LHP Loop heat pipe LISA Laser Interferometer Spaceborne Antenna LISN Line impedance stabilization network LNA Low noise ampliﬁer